Opening Question:
Tell me about yourself.
This is something you will be asked a lot at the beginning of an interview. Here are three tips that will help you nail the opener.
 
Be succinct, honest and engaging.
I call this the “SHE” formula. Resist the urge to give a detailed account of the last two decades of your career. The interviewer is looking for an answer that shows them you're qualified and can respond to an unstructured question.
 
Use the job description to prepare.
Reread what they want and highlight the most required skills that you have. Are they looking for someone who can solve problems or deal with tough customers? Pick a few and brainstorm how you can describe yourself while showcasing your strengths for what they’re seeking.
 
Tie your story to their needs.
People love a good tale, so weave in some personality. For example, maybe you fell in love with the hospitality industry because your grandparents ran a bed and breakfast. Connect your story back to the job, keep it short, and be truthful.

Example:
From a very early age I've been a problem solver. I was that kid who would take apart anything so I could see how it worked—and then try to put it back together. As you can imagine, it drove my parents nuts. But even though I tortured my family at times, the tinkering trait has served me well in my career. I look for the hardest problems to solve and where I can learn and develop the most. I have taken on many different types of projects. No matter what I’m working on, I’m very invested. I identify anyone I can learn from, as well as problems that I care about and try to optimize every step of the process. Proficient in coding, testing, debugging, and implementing application solutions using modern development tools and Azure cloud services. Strong documentation skills and ability to work collaboratively with senior developers. Holds relevant tertiary qualifications and has a minimum of 2 years of experience in a Microsoft Junior Developer or equivalent role. In my personal life, I spend a lot of time reading and usually have a focused area of interest for a longer period of time. 


 Q1) Can you describe the software development process you use?
Ans :-  This is an example of an opening or general question. 
 The interviewer will ask this type of question to begin a conversation, get you talking, find out a little bit more about you, and collect information 
 they can use for subsequent questions.
Example: “The software development process I use is the same one I learned early in my career and is very typical in the industry. 
 It begins with a requirement analysis which leads to the specifications and software architecture. 
 Once they are completed, I move on to development, implementation, testing, and documentation. 
 After this is done and the software is fully developed, my attention turns to training and support issues as well as ongoing maintenance and upgrades.”

Q2) In your opinion, what is the difference between computer software and a computer program?
Ans :- Explanation: An interviewer will ask this type of question to begin to explore your knowledge, skills, experience, and qualifications for the job. 
 Knowing the distinction between these two standard terms is not that difficult but will indicate you are a viable candidate and convince the interviewer to 
 proceed with the interview.
Example: “Many people confuse these two terms. The way I define them is that a computer program is a set of code that executes specific tasks. 
 Computer software, on the other hand, is an application that performs a function for the end-user. Computer software contains computer programs. 
 Computer software is more user-centric, whereas computer programs are more machine-centric.”

Q3) What types of development projects have you worked on recently?
Ans :- Explanation: The reason an interviewer will ask this question is to determine if you’ve recently done the type of work for which they are interviewing you. 
 During the interview, your answers to an interviewer’s questions should address the needs of the employer. These are typically defined in the job posting. 
 You may also be able to determine these during your pre-interview research about the company, its products, and practices.
Example :- “Most recently, I have been working on OLTP applications. Since most of my career has been in the financial industry, I began specializing in this type of programming. Areas I focus on are concurrency and atomicity. I have developed several sets of code around these functions using a variety of different programming languages.”
 
Q4) Which design patterns do you use, and in what situations do you use them?
 Ans :- Explanation: This is an operational question. Interviewers ask operational questions to determine how you go about completing the tasks required by this role. 
  Operational questions are best responded to succinctly and directly with little embellishment. Additionally, you should always expect follow-up questions 
  when an interviewer is asking about a specific task.
 Example :- “During my software development career, I’ve tried many different design patterns. These include Singleton, MVC, and Template. 
  However, the one I prefer and use most often is Iterator. This helps me code in an organized fashion and reduces the amount of time to develop the software. 
  It also results in fewer errors and less debugging.”
  
  // Expect follow up questions like what is MVC, Singleton and template.
  Q) Explain MVC in detail
  A model can be defined as the data that will be used by the program. Commonly used examples of models in MVC are the database, a simple object holding data (such as any     multimedia file or the character of a game), a file, etc.
  A view is a way of displaying objects (user interfaces) within an application. This is the particular vertical through which end users will communicate.
  A controller is the third vertical which is responsible for updating both models and views. It accepts input from users as well as performs the equivalent update. In other words, it is the controller which is responsible for responding to user actions.
  
Q5) What was the most challenging software development problem you have worked on, and how did it turn out?
 Ans :- Explanation: An interviewer will ask this question to gain an understanding of the scope of your experience and the type of projects you have worked on in the past. 
  The query is in the form of a behavioral question. You can respond to behavioral questions using the STAR framework. 
  State the Situation, define the Task you need to complete, discuss the Action you took, then describe the Results you attained.
 Example :- “The most challenging software project I’ve worked on recently involved an end-user application for managing team sports. 
  The challenge was that end-users had to have secure access to their own information without the ability to alter team or league data. 
  I had to develop the application on a short timeline and deploy it into a real-life scenario without a great deal of testing. 
  It also had to meet a price point which the market would accept. Recognizing that I did not have all the skills and experience necessary for this, I recruited 
  some additional developers, and we collaborated on the project. Together we were able to produce the software per the schedule and on budget.  
  This taught me to recognize my shortcomings and bring in additional resources when needed.”
  
 Q6) Tell me about the software development methodology you prefer?
 Ans :- Explanation: By asking this question, the interviewer is trying to determine if you are a good fit for their organization. 
  Software developers can choose from a lot of different methodologies, but when working on a team, they all need to use the same methodology. 
  Stating which methodology you use should be based on your pre-interview research. Your methodology should align with the one the company currently uses.
 Example: “The methodology I use most and prefer is Agile. The reason I like this iterative framework is there are daily stand-ups in which the team gets together 
  to discuss the day’s development goals and any issues we’ve encountered. The other reason I prefer to use Agile methodology is because errors are 
  identified and corrected at each stage of the process. This results in better quality software and less debugging at the end of the project.”
  
Q7) What QA process have you worked with in the past?
Ans :- Explanation: This is another operational question in which the interviewer is trying to determine the type of quality control systems you have worked with. They are looking to confirm that your processes are similar to the ones they use. Your experience doesn’t have to be an exact match, but you should be able to transition to their process as quickly as possible.

Example: “Since I develop using the Agile framework, the quality control processes I use the most are the ones used within this framework. 
I have worked with Waterfall, Just in Time, and SQA as well. I feel comfortable transitioning between QA processes, and I am confident I can easily adapt to anything you are using.”

// Expect follow up questions here too

Q8) How do you go about testing and finding bugs in applications you have developed?
Explanation: This is a follow-up to the previous question. Now that you told the interviewer what QA processes you use, you should be able to describe how you go about testing and debugging software. During an interview, you should anticipate follow-up questions whenever you provide an answer to the interviewer. This is why you should keep your answers short and direct. It provides the interviewer with an opportunity to either dive deeper into the topic or move on to something new.
Example: “When developing software, I use unit testing tools to identify errors in my code. I then go through a debugging process followed by more testing. Many people describe this process as White Box Testing. The debugging tools I use include gdb and dbx which are both public domain products. The reason I prefer these is they provide command-line interfaces that are easier for me to work with. Other tools I use include code-based tracers, profilers, and interpreters.”

Q9) Can you describe what you know about object-oriented programming?
Explanation: This is a technical question. Technical questions are meant to probe your knowledge, experience, and qualifications for the position for which you are interviewing. Technical questions are easily answered by first defining the term you are being asked about and then providing an example of how it is used in your profession.
Example: “I use object-oriented programming quite a bit. My definition of this is that it is the type of programming in which you define the data structure and also define the types of operations which can be applied to the data. The benefit of this approach is that it helps you logically organize code around a specific parameter. It also makes code easier to be maintained and documented.”

Q10) When you run into an obstacle during a software development project, how do you deal with it?
Explanation: This is another operational question in which the interviewer is trying to determine the steps you take when you run into an obstacle or setback during a programming project. Some operational questions are best responded to by taking the interviewer through the process you use step by step. Again, remember to keep your answer short and to the point. The interviewer will ask a follow-up question if they need additional information.
Example: “I have yet to work on a software development project where there haven’t been obstacles or setbacks. The key to dealing with them is to not get discouraged or distracted. I continue to focus on the task at hand and look for solutions to the obstacle I’ve encountered.  I utilize the collective knowledge of my entire team to help solve problems. When that doesn’t work, I turn to my programming resource guides, online resources, and other reference materials I can use to determine the best way to overcome the problem.”

Q11) Do you have an question for me?
Explanation: This question isn’t just designed to make sure you leave with all of your questions answered; it’s intended to see if you’re prepared and to assess how curious and thoughtful you are.
The way you respond to this question shows employers if you're engaged, intelligent and interested. Here are some tips on how to answer.

Use the 2 factor syndrome that is i.e. 
(i) Let them know you’re excited. While being qualified for the job is essential, showing passion for their products, brand or industry takes it to the next level. So maybe you can ask a question about one of your favorite products they make or see how they're responding to an industry trend.
(ii) Get them talking about their careers. People love talking about themselves and appreciate when you notice the interesting things they're doing. For example, you can ask them how they got from Job X to Job Y. People hire people that they like and who seem genuinely interested in the role.

Example: How do you think I should approach the first 30 days in the role to best position myself for success in a new culture? I know that your company has won numerous awards for workplace and community culture, and I have always prided myself in helping colleagues get active in the community. What do opportunities look like within your organization to get involved? 

Why this answer worked well:The answer shows that the candidate has done their homework, and has a genuine interest in getting involved across different aspects of the company culture and activities.The candidate showed their desire to be successful in the role by already thinking about the onboarding process.

Q12) Describe the most challenging project you undertook.
Employers want to get a sense of what ‘challenging’ means to you. They also want to know how you handled the situation in a calm way. They’re looking for a storyline to prove that you can turn a bad story into a good story.

Respond to this kind of question with a compelling story that uses the "SAR" framework: situation, action, and results.

Example: 
Situation:
During my time as a Junior .NET Developer, I was assigned to work on a project for a client in the healthcare industry. The project involved developing a web application to manage patient records and facilitate communication between doctors and patients. The project had a tight deadline and required integration with various external systems and APIs.

Action:
As the project progressed, we faced several challenges. One of the main challenges was the complexity of integrating with multiple external systems that had different data formats and authentication mechanisms. Additionally, the project requirements evolved over time, requiring frequent changes and updates to the application.

To tackle these challenges, I took the following actions:

Thoroughly researched and studied the documentation of the external systems to understand their APIs, data formats, and authentication methods.
Collaborated closely with the project team, including senior developers and business analysts, to analyze the evolving requirements and make informed decisions.
Implemented a flexible and modular architecture that allowed for easier integration with external systems and accommodated future changes without significant code refactoring.
Conducted extensive testing and debugging to ensure smooth data flow and seamless communication between the application and the external systems.
Maintained open communication with the client, providing regular progress updates, discussing challenges, and seeking their feedback and input throughout the development process.
Results:
By taking these actions, we were able to overcome the challenges and achieve successful outcomes:

We delivered the web application on time, meeting the client's deadline and expectations.
The application seamlessly integrated with the external systems, allowing doctors to access patient records and communicate effectively with their patients.
The application's modular architecture facilitated future updates and enhancements, ensuring its long-term scalability and maintainability.
The client expressed their satisfaction with the final product, praising our teamwork, problem-solving skills, and ability to deliver under pressure.
This challenging project provided me with valuable experience in navigating complex integrations, managing evolving requirements, and effectively communicating with clients. It taught me the importance of staying calm, being proactive, and collaborating with the team to overcome challenges and deliver successful solutions.

Q13) Why should we hire you?
This question tests how persuasive you are. Interviewers want to see if you can make a calm, confident case for yourself, even if they’re acting skeptical. They’re looking for factual and compelling answers.
This is a nerve-racking question, so make sure you're set up for success. Here are some tips that can help you do well in answering it: 
(i) Ask yourself why you think you’re qualified.
Prepare for the interview by picking three or four qualifications and experiences that help them understand why you're a fit for this job.
 
(ii) Tell them how you’d fit in.
Paint a picture of what you’d accomplish that gives you a leg up on the competition. Also, show them why you are a great match for this company by letting them see that you know about their mission, their vision, how they operate—and how you would fit into that really well.
 
(iii) Speak authentically.
How you say something is as important as what you say. So when you're sharing your successes and you're answering these questions, speak like the best version of yourself and make sure that you're doing it in a way that allows the interviewers to connect to you

Example: 
Having worked in start-up enviroment I was exposed to many things and forced to adapt quickly, I believe I am uniquely positioned to add a lot of value to this Developer role. What separates me from most is my ability to take a holistic view of the business, set the vision, and translate that into a set of strong strategic problem solving solutions. Working for a consulting firm taught me to balance the logic and data with the human side of things, which will be a competitive advantage in this ambiguous and dynamic industry. I’m motivated and excited to learn your company’s unique business model, and from my interactions with the employees here, I can see that we share values like respect, trust, and excellence. Overall, I believe I bring the right mix of skills, experiences and attitude for the job and think that my varied experience can add a lot of value here. 

Why this answer worked well:The answer incorporated specific qualifications that set the candidate apart.Strengths were framed through the lens of how they could benefit the company.





Additional Software Developer Interview Questions
How can an application be tested apart from its testing functionality?
When do you use polymorphism?
Are you familiar with cloud systems?
What would you do if a manager demanded delivery of software in an impossible deadline?
What are some things you may consider while creating a database?
 
   
  
